---
title: "Workers and Resources: An Appreciation"
date: 2024-09-20
updated_date: 2024-11-20
summary: On the glorious, money-abolishing, socialist resource management game.
category: notes
draft: true
---

Some of my favorite and most-played PC games are those that fall under the city building/economy simulation/systems management meta-genre, despite the fact that many of these games feel less like a leisure activity and more like working a full-time job, with more dashboards and analytics and obsessive multi-tasking than I deal with in a regular work day. But from the first moment I booted up _SimCity 4_ in high school to the hundreds of hours spent crafting perfect cities or zoos in _Cities: Skylines_ or _Planet Zoo_, I've been hooked. Construct a miniature ecosystem from nothing, wind the gears, and let it run—this is a recipe for a grand old time (and much of it, according to my Steam library).

(image)

But one thing I've noticed from playing a lot of these games is how they are not actually about creativity or experimentation or management, although of course you engage in plenty of that while playing. Rather, at base these games are reflections and simulations of a capitalistic mode of production—the _compulsion_ towards endless accumulation of profit by means of increasingly productive labor power.

Apart from any short-term goals or pleasures you might derive from constructing a cute little zoo populated with red pandas, in the long run you'll notice that you _must_ make that little bank balance in the corner of your screen go up, forever. It's the invisible hand, metaphor permitting, that drives your choices and keeps you coming back for more (and, not coincidentally, in a DLC-driven economy, spending more on many of these games).

At first glance, it seems telling that many games default to this model, but this is less surprising when considering the nature of ideology—here understood in the technical Marxist-Althusserian sense as the inescapable _representation_ of material reality that envelops conscious and unconscious collective life. In a capitalist world, games will reflect the values of capitalism, because they themselves exist within the material reality of that world and are by-products of its representation of itself; what is "obvious" under capitalism (the drive to make more money from money, because that's just "the way things are") is only obvious _because_ it is primarily ideological. Ideology, understood from within itself, is the unseen limit of representation beyond which is sheer unthinkability.

On the one hand, this obviousness trains us—subtly, covertly—to interact with the world just as it appears. Games that make you manage dashboards and budgets with an eye toward efficiency and profit help mold you into a better capitalist subject, or hopefully at least a mid-level manager (transferable skills!). The performance is part of what sustains the representation.

On the other hand, the game itself reproduces a reality where, in Althusser's words, "obviousnesses as obviousnesses" are imposed on subjects—which, inversely, closes off the cultural, political, and material possibilities of other realities. It is entirely the point that, in a game like _Cities: Skylines_, there shouldn't be _any other obvious way to play_ than as a wealthy capitalist town planner laying down single-family housing tracts in pristine, untouched wilderness, in order to support car-centered shopping centers. Under capitalism, that's obvious. Like capitalism, the game presents a surface level representation of the only way things can be while hiding the true material base. (Who are the laborers building those shopping centers? True to itself, the game doesn't care.)

And so it is a rare delight when a game comes along that breaks the mold—if not of ideology as such, then at least of some of its habitual and familiar forms. _Workers and Resources: Soviet Republic_ both defies and surpasses the conventions of a standard city builder. In its "real socialist" content, of course, it couldn't be more on the nose as an antagonist to a capitalistic management style.

Here is the nostalgic specter of [a foregone world](/posts/notes/the-age-of-extremes) that would have kept a Cold Warrior up at night—vague Eastern Bloc countries, command economies, secret police, brutalist public housing architecture, Leninist iconography, and—gasp!—free education and healthcare. There is much more here than meets the eye, however. Beneath the Soviet facade of _Workers and Resources_ is a game whose form itself, I would argue, is tentatively, and appropriately, anti-capitalist.

It is one of the few city-builder games I know of where money is not the ultimate object of concern but rather a means of achieving something else entirely—essentially, complete economic self-sufficiency for your burgeoning, nameless republic. It's the alternate-universe fantasy of a Soviet Union not beleaguered by NATO forces (no military options or war threats exist in this game), where the "bubble" of a self-sustaining command economy might have been allowed full, unchecked experimentation without interference from outside forces.

At the beginning of the game, you need to use money to purchase workers and resources (as the title naturally indicates) to build up your industrial and living centers. But as the game progresses and your production capacity grows, something like the inverse of Marx's opening chapters in _Capital: Volume 1_ takes place. For the workers in your republic are working not to create _value as such_ in the form of surplus profit, as they would under a capitalist mode of production, but simply the use-values of their labor and _surplus as such_. Money, as an equivalent of Marx's "congealed labor time," becomes less important in the game the more your societal division of labor can handle the needs of the economy.

If you need to build something in the game, say an apartment block, you apply the living labor power of your workers to the dead matter of the concrete, lumber, and steel that previous labor power has created, in order to create a new product which is valuable because of its _use_—to provide shelter to many people. The transaction is complete and there is nothing left over to accumulate; money, in its ghostly form as an equivalent of commodities, barely had time to contemplate an incorporeal body before it was snuffed out of existence.

What is interesting to me about this mechanism is how the "hidden abode of production" Marx darkly hinted at in _Capital_—that infernal realm of capitalist exploitation of labor power—is now laid bare to the outside world. This _unveiling_ counters the masking power of ideology; it shows, rather than hides, the material base of its economic world. As a result, money becomes largely superfluous; it returns to its ancient role as a mere transactional lubricant rather than a self-sustaining god.

(An aside: one of the things that makes this game truly pleasurable is the insane granularity of building something like in the above example. Games like _Cities: Skylines_ have you build just by clicking somewhere and spending money. In _Workers and Resources_, you not only have to spend literal hours leveling the ground, procure every type of building material, and ensure you have a workforce that can reach the site; you also have to build construction offices, buy trucks and fuel, and develop routes to deliver materials and people. It's both the [most simulation a simulator can offer](https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/workers-resources-soviet-republic-review) while also being transparent about the kinds of labor required.)

Incidentally, this movement also mirrors Marx's critique of the anarchist Proudhon, who wanted to abolish money from the top down (ironically) by replacing it with "time chits" equivalent to labor time. Marx derisively showed that such a substitution would not abolish money at all; it would merely remove it to another mediating force—in this case, the exploitative relations of capital would be locked up in time chits, rather than coins or paper money. The only possible way to abolish money, Marx argued, is to organically develop a social-economic system where it becomes unnecessary.

That system, we all know, is the nastiest of the most frightful hobgoblins of the world—communism.
